---
layout: post
title: "Neuroaugmentation et Chocolat"
date: 2013-10-13 15:20
author: Horea Christian
comments: true
categories: [meta, pharmacology, therapy, coaching] 
published: true
---

We had hoped to kick this blog off on a more scientific note -
but here we are.
Recently, we watched a movie difficult not to review in the context of the discussion around pharmacological neuroenhancement.

The context of this discussion is that many people regard pharmacological neuroenhancement as something utterly distinct from behavioural neuroenhancement (e.g. education, coaching, therapy, and meditation) -
and as something [game-changing and dangerous][mima2009].
And while we conclude that the movie *does* show pharmacological neuroenhancement as powerful - 
it also shows how seamlessly it integrates with other means of neuroenhancement and how inconspicuously it may already thrive in the world.

The movie is named “**Chocolat**” and the [plot](<http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chocolat_(2000_film)&oldid=575140700#Plot>) revolves around a woman setting up a chocolate shop in a very conservative village on the banks of the river Tarn.
Subsequently she wins over the locals one by one and ends up liberalizing and discreetly overthrowing the moral system of the village (championed by her primary antagonist, the mayor).

<!-- more -->

Neuroenhancement and pharmacology did - most probably - not cross the minds of the authors.
The movie is both light and artistic, and the main premise seems to be the triumph of liberalism over traditionalism.
And undoubtedly many of our readers would sympathize with that and think it an obvious development.

However, if we would pause and try to remove our ideological bias from the evaluation of the conflict, we would find ourselves confronted simply with two adversaries:

* One, the Comte (the aforementioned mayor), wielding the power of social repute, moral authority, and money.
* And the second, Vianne (the shop owner), wielding the power of.. well, *chocolate*.

Though they do confront each other directly on limited occasions, they mostly face off by proxy.
Their main modus operandi is convincing the town's folk of the benefits of following their ideology, over that of their disputant.

The Comte provides the town's people with a tranquil conscious by rewarding his followers with words of praise in church - this we could call **coaching**.
He also conveys the psychological benefits of following the Christian faith - which we could contextualize as encouraging **meditation** of sorts.
Not least of all, he seeks to instil proper manners, culture, and good social conduct - which we could see again as **coaching**, or as **education**.

Vianne does some **therapy** (for lack of a better word) on one particularly deranged character - 
but save for that, the main benefits for following her ideology are direct pleasure and anxiolysis.
What is even more interesting is that these benefits never come through liberalism alone, and never start with it.
They start with, and continue to be accompanied by *chocolate*.
We would take the leap here, and call that a **pharmacological** intervention.

Chocolate is not only a plot-irrelevant prop for the movie.
According to the plot development, without it, liberalism in itself would probably never have triumphed.

So, what is this to say about the nature of the conflict? 
Is Vianne a sort of attenuated drug dealer mesmerizing the town's people with her flashy rebelliousness all while getting them hooked on chocolate?
Is the Comte the champion of a ideology so weak that it is bound to fail when confronted with... *chocolate*?

Or is it rather a case of two more-or-less equally matched belief systems -
where the proponent of one just happens to use superior persuasion technologies than the proponent of the other?
If you watch the movie again, just pause and think:
What would have happened if some equally psychotropic concoction [as chocolate][nasser2011] would have been dispensed as an aerosol in church?

[nasser2011]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3734955 "Nasser JA, Bradley LE, Leitzsch JB, Chohan O, Fasulo K, Haller J, Jaeger K, Szulanczyk B, Del Parigi A (2011). “Psychoactive effects of tasting chocolate and desire for more chocolate.”. Physiology and Behaviour 2011 Jul 25;104(1):117-21. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.04.040"  
[mima2009]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19177803 "Mima T. “Social impact of recent advances in neuroscience”. Brain and Nerve 2009 Jan;61(1):18-26."

---
<sup>Browse the history of this file *or* find static versions to cite via [its GitHub page](https://github.com/TheChymera/chymeric_tutorials/blob/master/source/_posts/2013-10-13-chocolat.markdown)!</sup>

